README.md, before:

# E-Commerce Database Design

This project contains a relational database schema for a simple e-commerce web store, including:

- Product and <u>Category</u> management
- Customer and Orders structure
- Sample data for testing
- Useful reporting queries
---
## 📂 Structure

- [Tables Structure](schema/tables_structure.sql) : SQL script to create all tables with constraints and relationships
- [Sample Data](schema/sample_data.sql) : Sample data (100+ rows) to populate the tables
- [Queries](reporting_queries/) : Useful analytics and business queries
---
## 📊 ER Diagram

![Conceptual Data Model](diagrams/ERD.png)

![Conceptual Data Model](diagrams/schema.png)

---
## 💡 Reporting Queries

### 1. total revenue for a specific date :
```sql
declare @x date = '2025-02-21'

select sum(odetails.quantity * odetails.unit_price) as  [total revenue]
from orders as o join order_details as odetails
on o.order_id = odetails.order_id
and o.order_date = @x


---
-- alternate query 

declare @x date = '2025-02-21'

select sum(o.total_amount) as  [total revenue]
from orders as o 
where o.order_date = @x
```

### 2.  top-selling products in a given month:
```sql
declare @x int = 5

select top(3) p.product_name, sum(odetails.quantity) as  [total_quantity]
from product as p join order_details as odetails
on p.product_id = odetails.product_id join orders as o on o.order_id = odetails.order_id 
where MONTH(o.order_date) = @x
group by p.product_name
order by  [total_quantity] desc
```

### 3. orders totaling more than $500 in the past month:
```sql
select c.first_name + ' ' + c.last_name as customer_name , sum(odetails.quantity * odetails.unit_price) as [total_order_amount]
FROM customer c join orders o on c.customer_id = o.customer_id
	join order_details odetails on o.order_id = odetails.order_id
WHERE 
    o.order_date >= DATEADD(MONTH, -1, DATEFROMPARTS(YEAR(GETDATE()), MONTH(GETDATE()), 1))
    AND o.order_date < DATEFROMPARTS(YEAR(GETDATE()), MONTH(GETDATE()), 1)
GROUP BY c.customer_id, c.first_name, c.last_name
having sum(odetails.quantity * odetails.unit_price) > 500
```

### 4. denormalization table .
```sql
create table denormalized_order(
order_id int primary key,
customer_id int,
first_name varchar(50),
last_name varchar(50),
total_amount int check (total_amount >=0)
)


insert into denormalized_order(order_id, customer_id, first_name, last_name, total_amount)
select o.order_id, c.customer_id, c.first_name, c.last_name, o.total_amount
from customer c join orders o on c.customer_id = o.customer_id
```

### 5. all products with the word "camera" in either the product name or description:
1. using 'like' :
```sql
select * from PRODUCT where product_name like '%camera%' or description like '%camera%';

-- the previous query won't use indexes cause of leading wild card problem (using '%' at the begging of the word)
-- so the solution will be
-- first: create indexes on columns we want to search in

create index nameindex on product(product_name)
create index descindex on product(description)

-- second: the query limiting leading wildcard

select *
from product
where product_name like 'camera%' or description like 'camera%'
```
2. using FULL-TEXT-SEARCH :
```sql
-- creating full text catalog

CREATE FULLTEXT CATALOG catalog1

-- creating full text index on columns we will search on
CREATE FULLTEXT INDEX ON product(
    product_name LANGUAGE 1033,
    description LANGUAGE 1033
)
KEY INDEX UX_Product_Id
ON catalog1;

-- search using contains
select *
from PRODUCT
where contains(product_name,'camera')
or contains(description, 'camera')

```

### 6. query to suggest popular products in the same category for the same author:
```sql
SELECT P.product_id as [product id],
        p.product_name as [product name],
        p.category_id as [category id],
        p.product_author as [product author]
from product p join (select p.product_id as 'p_id' , p.category_id as 'c_id' , p.product_author 'p_author'
                      from product p join order_details od
                      on p.product_id = od.product_id join orders o on o.order_id = od.order_id
                      where o.customer_id = 5) as joinTable
on p.product_author = joinTable.p_author
    and p.category_id = joinTable.c_id 
where p.product_id != joinTable.p_id ;
```

### 7. trigger to Create a sale history [Above customer, product], when a new order is made in the "Orders" table
```sql
-- first: we create sales_history table
create table Sale_History(
orderId int not null,
CustId int not null,
CustName varchar(22) not null,
ProductName varchar(20) not null,
total_amount decimal(10,2),
quantity int,
order_date date,
Foreign key (CustId) references customer(customer_id),
Foreign key (orderId) references orders(order_id) )

-- second: trigger code
create trigger saleHistoryTrigger
on orders
after insert
as
	insert into Sale_History(orderId, CustId, CustName, ProductName, total_amount, quantity, order_date)
	select 
		i.order_id,
		c.customer_id,
		c.first_name ,
		p.product_name,
		od.quantity * od.unit_price as total_amount
		, od.quantity, i.order_date
	from inserted i
	join Customer c on i.customer_id = c.customer_id
	join ORDER_DETAILS od on od.order_id = i.order_id
	join PRODUCT p on p.product_id = od.product_id
```

### 8. transaction query to lock field 'quantity' from being updated .
```sql
BEGIN TRANSACTION
    SELECT stock_quantity
    FROM product WITH (UPDLOCK)
    WHERE product_id = 211

-- also we can create trigger to prevent this field from being updated
-- cause in previous query the lock is on the entire row not the field only

create trigger quantityTrigger
on product 
instead of update
as
begin
	if update(stock_quantity)
	Begin
		if exists (select 1 from inserted i where product_id = 211)
		begin
			raiserror('this field is locked',16,1);
			return;
		end

		update p
		set p.stock_quantity = i.stock_quantity
		from inserted i join product p
		on p.product_id = i.product_id
	End
end
```

### 9. transaction query to lock row with id=211 from being updated
```sql
begin transaction
	select *
	from PRODUCT with(UPDLOCK, ROWLOCK)
	where product_id = 211
```
---
## 👨‍💻 Technologies
- SQL Server 
- SQL

Commit message:

added setup section to README.md

README.md, after:

# E-Commerce Database Design

This project contains a relational database schema for a simple e-commerce web store, including:

- Product and <u>Category</u> management
- Customer and Orders structure
- Sample data for testing
- Useful reporting queries
  
---

## 🚀 Setup
1. Install SQL Server (2019 or later) or any compatible RDBMS.
2. Run the [Tables Structure](schema/tables_structure.sql) script to create the database schema.
3. Populate the database with [Sample Data](schema/sample_data.sql).
4. Explore the [Reporting Queries](reporting_queries/reporting_queries.sql) for analytics.

---

## 📂 Structure

- [Tables Structure](schema/tables_structure.sql) : SQL script to create all tables with constraints and relationships
- [Sample Data](schema/sample_data.sql) : Sample data (100+ rows) to populate the tables
- [Queries](reporting_queries/) : Useful analytics and business queries
  
---

## 📊 ER Diagram

![Conceptual Data Model](diagrams/ERD.png) : High-level view of the database structure

![Conceptual Data Model](diagrams/schema.png) : Detailed schema with relationships and constraints

---

## 💡 Reporting Queries

### 1. total revenue for a specific date :
```sql
declare @x date = '2025-02-21'

select sum(odetails.quantity * odetails.unit_price) as  [total revenue]
from orders as o join order_details as odetails
on o.order_id = odetails.order_id
and o.order_date = @x


---
-- alternate query 

declare @x date = '2025-02-21'

select sum(o.total_amount) as  [total revenue]
from orders as o 
where o.order_date = @x
```

### 2.  top-selling products in a given month:
```sql
declare @x int = 5

select top(3) p.product_name, sum(odetails.quantity) as  [total_quantity]
from product as p join order_details as odetails
on p.product_id = odetails.product_id join orders as o on o.order_id = odetails.order_id 
where MONTH(o.order_date) = @x
group by p.product_name
order by  [total_quantity] desc
```

### 3. orders totaling more than $500 in the past month:
```sql
select c.first_name + ' ' + c.last_name as customer_name , sum(odetails.quantity * odetails.unit_price) as [total_order_amount]
FROM customer c join orders o on c.customer_id = o.customer_id
	join order_details odetails on o.order_id = odetails.order_id
WHERE 
    o.order_date >= DATEADD(MONTH, -1, DATEFROMPARTS(YEAR(GETDATE()), MONTH(GETDATE()), 1))
    AND o.order_date < DATEFROMPARTS(YEAR(GETDATE()), MONTH(GETDATE()), 1)
GROUP BY c.customer_id, c.first_name, c.last_name
having sum(odetails.quantity * odetails.unit_price) > 500
```

### 4. Create Denormalized Order Table .
```sql
create table denormalized_order(
order_id int primary key,
customer_id int,
first_name varchar(50),
last_name varchar(50),
total_amount int check (total_amount >=0)
)


insert into denormalized_order(order_id, customer_id, first_name, last_name, total_amount)
select o.order_id, c.customer_id, c.first_name, c.last_name, o.total_amount
from customer c join orders o on c.customer_id = o.customer_id
```

### 5. all products with the word "camera" in either the product name or description:
1. using 'like' :
```sql
select * from PRODUCT where product_name like '%camera%' or description like '%camera%';

-- the previous query won't use indexes cause of leading wild card problem (using '%' at the begging of the word)
-- so the solution will be
-- first: create indexes on columns we want to search in

create index nameindex on product(product_name)
create index descindex on product(description)

-- second: the query limiting leading wildcard

select *
from product
where product_name like 'camera%' or description like 'camera%'
```
2. using FULL-TEXT-SEARCH :
```sql
-- creating full text catalog

CREATE FULLTEXT CATALOG catalog1

-- creating full text index on columns we will search on
CREATE FULLTEXT INDEX ON product(
    product_name LANGUAGE 1033,
    description LANGUAGE 1033
)
KEY INDEX UX_Product_Id
ON catalog1;

-- search using contains
select *
from PRODUCT
where contains(product_name,'camera')
or contains(description, 'camera')

```

### 6. query to suggest popular products in the same category for the same author:
```sql
SELECT P.product_id as [product id],
        p.product_name as [product name],
        p.category_id as [category id],
        p.product_author as [product author]
from product p join (select p.product_id as 'p_id' , p.category_id as 'c_id' , p.product_author 'p_author'
                      from product p join order_details od
                      on p.product_id = od.product_id join orders o on o.order_id = od.order_id
                      where o.customer_id = 5) as joinTable
on p.product_author = joinTable.p_author
    and p.category_id = joinTable.c_id 
where p.product_id != joinTable.p_id ;
```

### 7. trigger to Create a sale history [Above customer, product], when a new order is made in the "Orders" table
```sql
-- first: we create sales_history table
create table Sale_History(
orderId int not null,
CustId int not null,
CustName varchar(22) not null,
ProductName varchar(20) not null,
total_amount decimal(10,2),
quantity int,
order_date date,
Foreign key (CustId) references customer(customer_id),
Foreign key (orderId) references orders(order_id) )

-- second: trigger code
create trigger saleHistoryTrigger
on orders
after insert
as
	insert into Sale_History(orderId, CustId, CustName, ProductName, total_amount, quantity, order_date)
	select 
		i.order_id,
		c.customer_id,
		c.first_name ,
		p.product_name,
		od.quantity * od.unit_price as total_amount
		, od.quantity, i.order_date
	from inserted i
	join Customer c on i.customer_id = c.customer_id
	join ORDER_DETAILS od on od.order_id = i.order_id
	join PRODUCT p on p.product_id = od.product_id
```

### 8. transaction query to lock field 'quantity' from being updated .
```sql
BEGIN TRANSACTION
    SELECT stock_quantity
    FROM product WITH (UPDLOCK)
    WHERE product_id = 211

-- also we can create trigger to prevent this field from being updated
-- cause in previous query the lock is on the entire row not the field only

create trigger quantityTrigger
on product 
instead of update
as
begin
	if update(stock_quantity)
	Begin
		if exists (select 1 from inserted i where product_id = 211)
		begin
			raiserror('this field is locked',16,1);
			return;
		end

		update p
		set p.stock_quantity = i.stock_quantity
		from inserted i join product p
		on p.product_id = i.product_id
	End
end
```

### 9. transaction query to lock row with id=211 from being updated
```sql
begin transaction
	select *
	from PRODUCT with(UPDLOCK, ROWLOCK)
	where product_id = 211
```
---

## 👨‍💻 Technologies
- SQL Server (2019 or later)
- SQL
- Tools: SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS)
